# Schematics for the Nucleonics Corp of America Model RCR-1 General Scaler-Ratemeter

There are probably errors in this. I've included scans from my paper notes in case that's helpful to anyone.

I don't know how many of these there are surviving, but based on what I can find on the internet I think it's very few. If you have one, drop me a note.

[Here is a video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L2IJisdT82M&ab_channel=GeigerCounterVirtualMuseum) of one similar to mine (not my video).

Most of the circuit is pretty standard for the vacuum tube era, but there are two parts that are less common and worth a closer look.

## Modifications I made

* I rewired the AC line input for better safety and replaced the unpolarized two-prong cord with a grounded cord. The ground is tied to the chassis. The change is shown in the schematic.
* I replaced the Mallory capacitor can (4 x 20uF@450V) with a similar (475V) one from Antique Electronics Supply.
* I replaced the coax between the input BNC connector and the 12AX7 input buffer. The dielectric insulation in the old coax was crumbling.
* I replaced the Selenium Rectifier with ten GP02-40 Silicon rectifiers in series. This totals 13.2 Vf (measured), which wasn't quite close enough to the original rectifier, and the voltage dropped to -36V. I added resistance to get it back to -33V. This is probably not the original voltage, but it has been working well.
* The HV meter reading were off by quite a bit - for example, when the meter indicated 920V, the actual output was 817V. I recalibrated the HV meter by measuring the high voltage and adding resistance to the divider chain to restore accurate readings.
* I added a connector between the mechanical hundreds counter and the rest of the unit to make it easy to remove for service.
* I cleaned and very lightly lubricated the hundreds counter

## Interesting features

### Voltage multiplier

The high voltage supply functions similarly to the familiar modern switching boost regulator, although in this instrument, it's unregulated, as there is no feedback loop for regulation.

The 6V6 beam-power tetrode is driven by a neon bulb relaxation oscillator which uses the [Pearson–Anson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearson%E2%80%93Anson_effect) effect. The high voltage is rectified by the 5517 tube.

The output voltage is adjustable for different Geiger-Muller tubes. The output voltage drifts downward over several hours as the instrument warms up. This may be due to the high temperature coefficient of the carbon composition resistors used, but I haven't investigated.

### Decatron tubes and drivers

The instrument uses GC10B counter Decatron tubes for the ones and tens indicators, and an electromechanical solenoid-actuated counter for hundreds.

The GC10B [Decatrons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dekatron) require a pahsed application of voltage to two "guide electrodes" to advance the indicator to the next position. The signals are generated by a 12BH7 tube with one triode half acting as an amplifier, and the other acting as an inverter. The "carry" cathodes are used to drive the tens indicator, and to drive the solenoid driver for the hundreds counter.

## Notes

The instrument is essentially analog, with pulse amplification throughout and multiple signal paths. Because of this, it's possible to have what might seem like unexpected behavior. For example - with a [Geiger-Muller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geiger%E2%80%93M%C3%BCller_tube) from a [CD V-700](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CD_V-700) counter, everything works as expected with a tube voltage between 900 and 920 Volts. However, if the tube voltage is around 880 volts, you will still get audio clicks indicating pulses, but the Decatron indicator will only advance intermittently.
